Kurt is a Kazakh dried fermented milk product.

https://www.fondazioneslowfood.com/en/ark-of-taste-slow-food/kurt-cheese/

https://www.orexca.com/kazakhstan/cuisine/dishes_meals.htm


QURT
This is a type of cheese made from dehydrated sour cream by forming small balls and letting it dry. Traditionally, kurt was 
useful for long treks on horseback across the steppe.



Kaimak (sour cream) - This is also made of milk, rendered as scum from boiled milk. Kazakhs used to drink tea with it. In fall,
 when the grass was more nutritious, there was thick sour cream on the milk. This would be spread on bread, and kids enjoyed 
 eating it. Sometimes Kazakhs dried it and sent to children who lived in remote areas, usually in cans. So kaimak or scum 
 especially was a food of kids and elder.

butter - Is made old milk. In ancient time Kazakh women used different methods of processing butter. After milking, the liquid 
was poured into a large bowl and put on even place. When it had scums or sour cream they'd accumulate it, then shaking or 
stirring it for long hours. In hot weather it was difficult to process butter, so it had to be kept in cold place. For women who 
owned a leather bag, the process was easier. They could start with sour milk and then just shake the bag.

In early times a Kazakh family might have two leather bags, one for processing kumiss the other for butter. Those who hadn't a 
horse had only one saba (leather bag). After shaking well, they'd put some salt in butter and then put it into sheep's dried 
stomach. Every family had a cleaned and dried stomach for preserving butter. Here irkit or fermented sour milk would flow out, 
leaving the butter behind. From fermented sour milk, Kazakhs brewed kurt which they would sometimes drink as a beverage. Kazakhs 
stored winter food for summer pasture, especially several stomachs of butter, sacks of kurt, curds, thick sour milk. Together 
with meat remaining from the previous winter slaughtering it would be enough for several months, Nowadays butter in the shops 
seems not as nutritious and tasty as that processed without machines by saba. So people prefer and miss the old hand-made butter.

Kurt - This is a product prepared by the process of pressing thick sour cream. After boiling fermented sour milk, it was poured 
it into a sack or bag. Here it would get rid of yellow water. Then the women would make kurts and put on the ore (discussed in 
an earlier chapter). Kurt might be of different shapes and sizes; and that dried at the foot of a mountain would be white and 
salty.

Kurt dried in deserts would be bitter and tough; biting it you could break your teeth. If it was bitter it was unpleasant to 
eat, so women looked for a shady place to dry the kurt. It was also important to dry it in the windy place because in a shady 
place without wind it could grow mouldy. Kazakhs used to drink tea with kurt. They also spread butter on it and ate it when they 
had no bread.

In early times there was a tool to press kurt, but now nobody has one. After pressing it would be added to the broth or to wheat 
porridge or drunk by itself. Usually Kazakhs and Kalmyks made kurt. Uigurs also used to make it, but neither group could make it 
as well as Kazakhs. They dried kurts in the shape of hoop, but it wasn't as tasty and it was difficult to press. Today's machine 
made kurts are even.